MM-31917: Publish style guide (#751)
mattermost/mattermost-developer-documentation: site/content/contribute/server/style-guide.md

This rule is not yet fully applied to the `model` package due to backwards compatibility requirements.

#### Empty string check

Use `foo == ""` to check for empty strings, not `len(foo) == 0`.

#### [Reduce indentation](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments#indent-error-flow)

If there are multiple return statements in an if-else statement, remove the else block and outdent it.

This is an example from `mlog/human/parser.go`:

```go
// Look for an initial "{"
if token, err := dec.Token(); err != nil {
	return result, err
} else {
	d, ok := token.(json.Delim)
	if !ok || d != '{' {
		return result, fmt.Errorf("input is not a JSON object, found: %v", token)
	}
}
```

This can be simplified to:

```go
// Look for an initial "{"
if token, err := dec.Token(); err != nil {
	return result, err
}
d, ok := token.(json.Delim)
if !ok || d != '{' {
	return result, fmt.Errorf("input is not a JSON object, found: %v", token)
}
```

#### [Initialisms](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments#initialisms)

Use `userID` rather than `userId`. Same for abbreviations; `HTTP` is preferred over `Http` or `http`.

> This rule is not yet fully applied to the `model` package due to backwards compatibility requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This rule is not yet fully applied to the `model` package due to backward compatibility requirements.
```

#### [Receiver Names](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments#receiver-names)

> The name of a method's receiver should be a reflection of its identity; often a one or two letter abbreviation of its type suffices (such as "c" or "cl" for "Client"). Don't use generic names such as "me", "this" or "self", identifiers typical of object-oriented languages that give the variable a special meaning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The name of a method's receiver should be a reflection of its identity; often a one or two letter abbreviation of its type suffices (such as "c" or "cl" for "Client"). Don't use generic names such as "me", "this", or "self" identifiers typical of object-oriented languages that give the variable a special meaning.
```

## Proposing a new rule

To propose a new rule, follow the process below:

- Add it to the agenda in the [Server](https://community.mattermost.com/core/channels/developers-server) Guild meeting, and propose it.
- If it gets accepted, create a go-vet rule (if possible), or a golangci-lint rule to prevent new regressions from creeping in.
- Fix all existing issues.

> - Add it to this guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add it to this guide.

```

The `model` package is our public API which is consumed by many plugins and 3rd party integrations. The need to maintain backwards-compatibility for these external users of the `model` package prevents us from immediately bringing it into compliance with some of the rules outlined in this document.

In order to avoid delaying the adoption of these rules in the wider codebase, we have chosen to temporarily exempt only the `model` package from certain rules (indicated below). However, outside of the `model` package, these rules should be followed in all new or modified code.

### Application of Guidelines

Aside from the specific exceptions made for backward compatibility in the `model` package, all new commits should follow the rules as outlined in this and the linked documents, for both new and modified code.

This does not, however, mean that a developers is *required* to fix any surrounding code that contravenes the rules in the style guide. It is encouraged to keep fixing things as you go, but it is not compulsory to do so. Reviewers should refrain from asking for stylistic changes in surrounding code if the submitter has not included them in their pull request.

> ## Guidelines

Reviewer 2: Wondering if we should change this to `The Rules` instead? What do you think?

Author: I'd prefer to use `Guidelines`. `Rules` bring a more strict connotation. You can strictly apply the style rules, but the interfaces and concurrency stuff cannot be rules. They need to be considered as guidelines which may need to be skipped in cases.

Reviewer 2: :+1:

> ## Functional

Reviewer 2: Do we need an extra heading level here (and for it's sub-headings)?

Author: Sure.

- What’s the tradeoff of the happy path vs. slow path?
- How do I propagate errors?
- What about back-pressure?
- What should be my concurrency model?

Do not create one-off goroutines without knowing when/how they exit. They cause problems that are hard to debug, and can often cause performance degradation rather than an improvement. Have a look at:
- https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments#goroutine-lifetimes
- https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments#synchronous-functions

### Pointers to slices

Do not use pointers to slices. Slices are already reference types which point to an underlying array. If you want a function to modify a slice, then return that slice from the function, rather than passing a pointer.

This rule is not yet fully applied to the `model` package due to backwards compatibility requirements.

### Avoid creating more ToJSON methods

Do not create new `ToJSON` methods for model structs. Instead, just use `json.Marshal` at the call site. This has two major benefits:
- It avoids bugs due to the suppression of the JSON error which happens with `ToJSON` methods (we've had a number of bugs caused by this).

> - It is a common pattern to pass the output to something (like a network call) which accepts a byte slice, leading to a double conversion from byte-slice to string to a byte-slice again if `ToJSON` methods are used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- It is a common pattern to pass the output to something (like a network call) which accepts a byte-slice, leading to a double conversion from byte-slice to string to a byte-slice again if `ToJSON` methods are used.
```

Reviewer 2: (just for consistency within the paragraph)

Use `foo == ""` to check for empty strings, not `len(foo) == 0`.

### [Reduce indentation](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments#indent-error-flow)

If there are multiple return statements in an if-else statement, remove the else block and outdent it.

This is an example from `mlog/human/parser.go`:

```go
// Look for an initial "{"
if token, err := dec.Token(); err != nil {
	return result, err
} else {
	d, ok := token.(json.Delim)
	if !ok || d != '{' {
		return result, fmt.Errorf("input is not a JSON object, found: %v", token)
	}
}
```

This can be simplified to:

```go
// Look for an initial "{"
if token, err := dec.Token(); err != nil {
	return result, err
}
d, ok := token.(json.Delim)
if !ok || d != '{' {
	return result, fmt.Errorf("input is not a JSON object, found: %v", token)
}
```

### [Initialisms](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments#initialisms)

Use `userID` rather than `userId`. Same for abbreviations; `HTTP` is preferred over `Http` or `http`.

This rule is not yet fully applied to the `model` package due to backwards compatibility requirements.

### [Receiver Names](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments#receiver-names)

> The name of a method's receiver should be a reflection of its identity; often a one or two letter abbreviation of its type suffices (such as "c" or "cl" for "Client"). Don't use generic names such as "me", "this" or "self", identifiers typical of object-oriented languages that give the method a special meaning.

Reviewer 2: Slightly confused about what "give the method a special meaning" here means. Does it mean that they distinguish between a "method" and a "function", or that they give "self" or "this" a special meaning?

Author: The latter. Happy to rephrase in some other way that you prefer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The name of a method's receiver should be a reflection of its identity; often a one or two letter abbreviation of its type suffices (such as "c" or "cl" for "Client"). Don't use generic names such as "me", "this" or "self", identifiers typical of object-oriented languages that give the variable a special meaning.
```

Best I can come up with. What do you think?

Author: Works for me!

date: 2021-01-12T16:00:00+0530
weight: 3
subsection: Server
---

Go is a more opinionated language than many others when it comes to coding style. The compiler enforces some basic stylistic elements, such as the removal of unused variables and imports. Many others are enforced by the `gofmt` tool, such as usage of white-space, semicolons, indentation, and alignment. The `gofmt` tool is run over all code in the Mattermost Server CI pipeline. Any code which is not consistent with the formatting enforced by `gofmt` will not be accepted into the repository.

Despite this, there are still many areas of coding style which are not dictated by these tools. Rather than reinventing the wheel, we are adopting [Effective Go](https://golang.org/doc/effective_go.html) as a basis for our style guide. On top of that, we also follow the guidelines laid out by the Go project at [CodeReviewComments](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments).

However, at present, some of the guidelines from these sources come into conflict with existing patterns that are present in our codebase which cannot immediately be corrected due to the need to maintain backward compatibility.

> This document, which should be read in conjunction with [Effective Go](https://golang.org/doc/effective_go.html) and [CodeReviewComments](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments), outlines the small number of exceptions we make to maintain backwards compatibility, as well as a number of additional stylistic rules we have adopted on top of those external recommendations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document, which should be read in conjunction with [Effective Go](https://golang.org/doc/effective_go.html) and [CodeReviewComments](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments), outlines the small number of exceptions we make to maintain backward compatibility, as well as a number of additional stylistic rules we have adopted on top of those external recommendations.
```

This rule is not yet fully applied to the `model` package due to backward compatibility requirements.

#### Avoid creating more ToJSON methods

Do not create new `ToJSON` methods for model structs. Instead, just use `json.Marshal` at the call site. This has two major benefits:

- It avoids bugs due to the suppression of the JSON error which happens with `ToJSON` methods (we've had a number of bugs caused by this).
- It's a common pattern to pass the output to something (like a network call) which accepts a byte-slice, leading to a double conversion from byte-slice to string to a byte-slice again if `ToJSON` methods are used.

#### [Interfaces](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments#interfaces)

- Return structs, accept interfaces.
- Interface names should end with “-er”. This is not a strict rule. Just a guideline which indicates the fact that interface functionalities are designed around the concept of “doing” something.
- Try not to define interfaces on the implementer side of an API "for mocking"; instead, design the API so that it can be tested using the public API of the real implementation.

> As an example, if you are trying to integrate with a third-party service, it is tempting to create an interface and use that in the code so that it can be easily mocked in the test. This is an anti-pattern and masks real bugs. Instead, you should try to use the real implementation via a docker container or if that's not feasible, mock the network response coming from the external process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an example, if you're trying to integrate with a third-party service, it's tempting to create an interface and use that in the code so that it can be easily mocked in the test. This is an anti-pattern and masks real bugs. Instead, you should try to use the real implementation via a docker container or if that's not feasible, mock the network response coming from the external process.
```

Another common pattern is to preemptively declare the interface in the source package itself, so that the consumer can just directly import the interface. Instead, try to declare the interface in the package which is going to consume the functionality. Often, different packages have non-overlapping set of functionalities to consume. If you do find several consumers of the package, remember that interfaces can be composed. So define small chunks of functionalities in different interfaces, and let consumers compose them as needed. Take a look at the set of interfaces in the [io](https://golang.org/pkg/io/) package.

> These are just guidelines and not strict rules. Understand your use-case and apply them appropriately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These are just guidelines and not strict rules. Understand your use case and apply them appropriately.
```

### Stylistic

#### [CamelCase variables/constants](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments#mixed-caps)

We use CamelCase names like WebsocketEventPostEdited, not WEBSOCKET_EVENT_POST_EDITED.

> This rule is not yet fully applied to the `model` package due to backwards compatibility requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This rule is not yet fully applied to the `model` package due to backward compatibility requirements.
```

This does NOT however mean that a developer has to fix any surrounding code to fix the style issues too. It’s encouraged to keep fixing things as we go, but it is NOT compulsory to do so and there is no need for a reviewer to ask for that change if it is not something that is added/edited in that PR.

The following goes into some of the specific anti-patterns that have crept in our codebase and we should aim to correct. The rules which are exempt from being applied in the model package are specifically indicated.

## Guidelines

### Default to sync instead of async

Always prefer synchronous functions by default. Async calls are hard to get right. They have no control over goroutine lifetimes and introduce data races. If you think something needs to be asynchronous, measure it and prove it. Ask these questions:

> - Does it improve performance? How much?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Does it improve performance? If so, by how much?
```

> - What’s the tradeoff of the happy path vs slow path?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- What’s the tradeoff of the happy path vs. slow path?
```

- How do I propagate errors?
- What about back-pressure?
- What should be my concurrency model?

> Avoid creating one-off goroutines without knowing when/how they exit. They cause hard to debug problems and can often cause performance degradation rather than an improvement. Have a look at:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Avoid creating one-off goroutines without knowing when/how they exit. They cause problems that are hard to debug, and can often cause performance degradation rather than an improvement. Have a look at:
```

> - https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments#goroutine-lifetimes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments#goroutine-lifetimes
```

> - https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments#synchronous-functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments#synchronous-functions
```

### Pointers to slices (exempt from model)

Avoid using pointers to slices. Slices are already reference types which point to an underlying array. If you want a function to modify a slice, then return that slice from the function, rather than passing a pointer.

### [CamelCase variables/constants](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments#mixed-caps) (exempt from model)

We prefer to use names like WebsocketEventPostEdited, not WEBSOCKET_EVENT_POST_EDITED.

### Empty string check

Use == "" to check empty strings, not len(s) == 0. This will be enforced with a linter soon.

### [Reduce indentation](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments#indent-error-flow)

If there are multiple return statements in an if-else statement, remove the else block and outdent it.

> This is a sample code from mlog/human/parser.go:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a sample code from `mlog/human/parser.go`:
```

```go

> // look for an initial "{"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Look for an initial "{"
```

if token, err := dec.Token(); err != nil {
	return result, err
} else {
	d, ok := token.(json.Delim)
	if !ok || d != '{' {
		return result, fmt.Errorf("input is not a JSON object, found: %v", token)
	}
}
```

This can be simplified to:

```go

> // look for an initial "{"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Look for an initial "{"
```

if token, err := dec.Token(); err != nil {
	return result, err
}
d, ok := token.(json.Delim)
if !ok || d != '{' {
	return result, fmt.Errorf("input is not a JSON object, found: %v", token)
}
```

### Avoid creating more ToJSON methods

> We should avoid creating ToJSON methods for model structs. And just use json.Marshal at the call site. This has 2 main benefits:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We should avoid creating ToJSON methods for model structs. And just use `json.Marshal` at the call site. This has two main benefits:
```

---
title: "Style guide"
date: 2021-01-12T16:00:00+0530
weight: 3
subsection: Server
---

The overarching guideline is to just follow [Effective Go](https://golang.org/doc/effective_go.html) along with [CodeReviewComments](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments). But currently, implementing those rules can lead to a clash between maintaining consistency and enforcing correctness. This document aims to codify some of the rules in the hope that any confusion is alleviated.

### Model package

> The `model` package is our public API which is consumed by multiple plugins. Having a non-idiomatic public API should not prevent us from improving the rest of the codebase. More code keeps getting added, and it becomes practically impossible to fix all of the issues at once. Instead, we choose to have consistency in that package only if changing it makes it inconsistent from an API perspective. This includes both breaking changes and any inconsistencies that might appear in godocs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `model` package is our public API which is consumed by many plugins and 3rd party integrations. The need to maintain backwards-compatibility for these external users of the `model` package prevents us from immediately bringing it into compliance with some of the rules outlined in this document.

In order to avoid delaying the adoption of these rules in the wider codebase, we have chosen to temporarily exempt only the `model` package from certain rules (the affected rules are indicated below). However, outside of the `model` package, these rules should be followed in all new or modified code.
```

> There are some rules which don’t need an API change and can be used everywhere. In all other packages, we should enforce correctness. Once we move to v6 of the `mattermost-server`, we can change the remaining places to match with the rest of the codebase.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> This does not, however, mean that a developer has to fix any surrounding code to fix the style issues too. It’s encouraged to keep fixing things as we go, but it's not compulsory to do so. There's also no need for a reviewer to ask for that change if it's not something that's added/edited in that PR.
> 
> The following goes into some of the specific anti-patterns that have crept in our codebase and we should aim to correct. The rules which are exempt from being applied in the model package are specifically indicated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Application of Guidelines

Aside from the specific exceptions made for backwards compatibility in the `model` package, all new commits should follow the rules as outlined in this and the linked documents, for both new and modified code.

This does not, however, mean that a developer is *required* to fix any surrounding code that contravenes the rules in the style guide. It is encouraged to keep fixing things as you go, but it is not compulsory to do so. Reviewers should refrain from asking for stylistic changes in surrounding code if the submitter has not included them in their pull request.
```

## Guidelines

### Default to sync instead of async

Always prefer synchronous functions by default. Async calls are hard to get right. They have no control over goroutine lifetimes and introduce data races. If you think something needs to be asynchronous, measure it and prove it. Ask these questions:
- Does it improve performance? If so, by how much?
- What’s the tradeoff of the happy path vs. slow path?
- How do I propagate errors?
- What about back-pressure?
- What should be my concurrency model?

> Avoid creating one-off goroutines without knowing when/how they exit. They cause problems that are hard to debug, and can often cause performance degradation rather than an improvement. Have a look at:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Do not create one-off goroutines without knowing when/how they exit. They cause problems that are hard to debug, and can often cause performance degradation rather than an improvement. Have a look at:
```

- https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments#goroutine-lifetimes
- https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments#synchronous-functions

> ### Pointers to slices (exempt from model)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Pointers to slices
```

> Avoid using pointers to slices. Slices are already reference types which point to an underlying array. If you want a function to modify a slice, then return that slice from the function, rather than passing a pointer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Do not use pointers to slices. Slices are already reference types which point to an underlying array. If you want a function to modify a slice, then return that slice from the function, rather than passing a pointer.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

<aside>This rule is not yet fully applied to the `model` package due to backwards compatibility requirements.</aside>
```

> ### [CamelCase variables/constants](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments#mixed-caps) (exempt from model)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### [CamelCase variables/constants](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments#mixed-caps)
```

> We prefer to use names like WebsocketEventPostEdited, not WEBSOCKET_EVENT_POST_EDITED.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use CamelCase names like WebsocketEventPostEdited, not WEBSOCKET_EVENT_POST_EDITED.
```

Reviewer 2: A further question on this one: does this apply to all variable names too, or just to `const` block items? Do variables/constants have different rules for first-letter capitalisation? Maybe we need to be more specific here.

Author: No there is no difference between them. First letter captialization only comes when we want to export something, which is orthogonal to this.

Reviewer 2: :facepalm: you can tell I haven't actually written much go lately...

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

<aside>This rule is not yet fully applied to the `model` package due to backwards compatibility requirements.</aside>
```

### Empty string check

> Use == "" to check empty strings, not len(s) == 0. This will be enforced with a linter soon.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use `foo == ""` to check for empty strings, not `len(foo) == 0`.
```

Don't think we need the comment about the linter - these are likely to go out of date once we've added the linter.

### [Reduce indentation](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments#indent-error-flow)

If there are multiple return statements in an if-else statement, remove the else block and outdent it.

> This is a sample code from `mlog/human/parser.go`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is an example from `mlog/human/parser.go`:
```

```go
// Look for an initial "{"
if token, err := dec.Token(); err != nil {
	return result, err
} else {
	d, ok := token.(json.Delim)
	if !ok || d != '{' {
		return result, fmt.Errorf("input is not a JSON object, found: %v", token)
	}
}
```

This can be simplified to:

```go
// Look for an initial "{"
if token, err := dec.Token(); err != nil {
	return result, err
}
d, ok := token.(json.Delim)
if !ok || d != '{' {
	return result, fmt.Errorf("input is not a JSON object, found: %v", token)
}
```

### Avoid creating more ToJSON methods

> We should avoid creating ToJSON methods for model structs. And just use `json.Marshal` at the call site. This has two main benefits:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Do not create new `ToJSON()` methods for model structs. Instead, just use `json.Marshal` at the call site. This has two major benefits:
```

Author: The `()` is actually not used for method/function documentation. :P I learnt this the hard way in a code review. `ToJSON` is the actual name of the method.

Reviewer 2: Ah OK, good to know. Please ignore those bits of my suggestions then :)

> - We’ve had to fix multiple bugs due to suppressing the JSON error which happens with ToJSON methods.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- It avoids bugs due to the suppression of the JSON error which happens with `ToJSON()` methods (we've had a number of bugs caused by this).
```

> - A lot of times, we pass the output to something (like a network call) which accepts a byte slice, leading to a double conversion from byte-slice to string to a byte-slice again.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- It is a common pattern to pass the output to something (like a network call) which accepts a byte slice, leading to a double conversion from byte-slice to string to a byte-slice again if `ToJSON()` methods are used.
```

> ### [Initialisms](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments#initialisms) (exempt from model)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### [Initialisms](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments#initialisms)
```

> We prefer to use userID rather than userId. Same for abbreviations; HTTP is preferred over Http or http. This will be enforced with the linter soon.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use `userID` rather than `userId`. Same for abbreviations; `HTTP` is preferred over `Http` or `http`.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

<aside>This rule is not yet fully applied to the `model` package due to backwards compatibility requirements.</aside>
```

### [Interfaces](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments#interfaces)

- Return structs, accept interfaces.
- Interface names should end with “-er”. This is not a strict rule. Just a guideline which indicates the fact that interface functionalities are designed around the concept of “doing” something.

> - Try not to define interfaces on the implementer side of an API "for mocking"; instead, design the API so that it can be tested using the public API of the real implementation.

Reviewer 2: Not blocking for this review, but I think particularly the latter two points in this list would benefit from some sample code.

Author: Added in this review itself.

### [Receiver Names](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments#receiver-names)

The name of a method's receiver should be a reflection of its identity; often a one or two letter abbreviation of its type suffices (such as "c" or "cl" for "Client"). Don't use generic names such as "me", "this" or "self", identifiers typical of object-oriented languages that give the method a special meaning.

> The above was just a short list of existing issues in the repo which should be rectified. In general, the broad list of rules are already available at [Effective Go](https://golang.org/doc/effective_go.html) and [CodeReviewComments](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments.). They should be referred to whenever doing a code review.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
